so the first three minutes
well before we do that the universe
today
the headlines would be that there are
four forces in nature
gravity electromagnetism the weak
nuclear force
and the strong nuclear force and
scientists have two theories that
describe
everything general relativity which
describes
the first of those gravity and quantum
mechanics which covers the other three
our biggest problem in theoretical
physics is trying to make those
two into one theory that fits everything
and that's been uh a challenge for
50 years or more
so right back at the beginning
in the first 10 to the minus 44 of a
second
space was less than 10 to the minus 35
meters across these numbers
are the planck time 10 to the minus 44
seconds
and the planck length 10 to the minus 35
meters and the
ratio between them is the speed of light
the uh
that you would find that light could
travel
one plank length in one planck time unit
so it was a tiny little thing
of course all of the energy and matter
being packed
so closely together
creates an enormous amount of
gravitational
curvature of the space and of time
in fact it becomes so complicated and
entangled that it's really a chaotic
foam there's a way of thinking about
it so chaotic is it
that there aren't really any clear
notions
of the difference between here
and there or now
and then or before and after
these concepts of the difference between
space and the and time really don't mean
anything
in this very very first instant
of time or instant of the existence
of the universe
so this is called the planck epoch and
it's
the time when all four of the forces
gravity the strong nuclear force the
weak force
and electromagnetism were all
combined as one unified
uh single entity and the whole universe
is a gravitational singularity
essentially a massive highly energetic
quantum black hole now
we can say all of this we can't do the
maths
because our equations blow up in our
face at this level
so this is a strong hypothesis
rather than what you might call a solid
theory
so what happened next
well for some unknown reason
expansion kicks in and this is really
the big bang starting and
if you want to know what caused the big
bang then unfortunately you probably
need a philosopher or a priest
to answer the question rather than a
scientist at this point because we have
no idea
what we do believe though is that the
expansion
kicked in and gravity
emerged because space time
emerged from the chaos the other four
the other three forces remained um
unified
and the universe was just a soup of
energy
with a temperature of 10 to the power 32
degrees kelvin
so hot that everything was flying around
and there was so much energy that no
particle was able to condense
at this temperature it would be
destroyed by an interaction as soon as
it did
and so around 10 to the minus 37 of a
second
after the big bang so that's quite a few
planck times later if you work it out
we've gone from
10 to the minus 44 to 10 to the minus 37
that's
um an increase in time of a factor of
10 million and the
expansion has cooled the universe
down to a temperature of only 10 to the
power 28 degrees kelvin
and at this point the universe underwent
some sort of phase
change which gave it a huge kick
which scientists call inflation
which was an idea from alan guth
back in the late 70s which suggested
that
the universe suddenly began expanding
because of this uh what he calls a false
vacuum state
which is a little bit too complicated to
explain but it's something
changed and caused this inflation to
kick
off and then 10 times
further into the universe at 10 to the
minus 36 of a second
the temperature dropped enough with the
expansion
that the strong nuclear force
was able to separate away from the
electromagnetic and weak forces leaving
those two combined
and that's another of example of these
phase changes
that gives the universe a further push
in expansion
you can think of a phase change
as what happens when you boil your
kettle
you make the water turn into steam water
vapor
it's changing phase from the liquid
phase to the gas phase
and you have to put energy in in that
case but
if you stick your hand over the top of
the kettle while this is happening
and i wouldn't recommend you try it
you'll burn your hand on the steam
because the steam will recondense it'll
undergo the
energy dropping phase change
and release a vast amount of heat into
your hand
and burn it and it's these downward
dropping
phase changes in the early universe that
we're talking about
so it's as if the universe was
condensing from
a more volatile to a less volatile state
so a word about inflation and why we
think it was there we think it
increased the size of the universe
at an enormous rate in this very short
time
period between 10 to the minus 37
and 10 to the minus 32 seconds
it increased the extent of the universe
by a factor of 10 to the power 26
and absolutely enormous number
and we believe that because of
the cosmic microwave background
radiation that we observe
being so nearly perfectly smooth
the idea is that in the inflation
expanding the universe by such an
enormous amount
effectively ironed out all the quantum
ripples that they would have been that
would have existed
on quite small time size scales
to exist over much larger size scales
and therefore appear nearly flat much as
the ant
on the balloon here as the balloon
begins
to be inflated the ant can see the
curvature
of the surface of the balloon but if you
blew the balloon up to the size of the
universe
then the ant can't see that the surface
is in fact curved it looks flat to it
it's the same idea
and again the temperature is always
dropping as the universe expands so
we're now down to 10 to the 22
kelvins
now there is an issue that's uh
associated with
with this and why we believe that
inflation solves it
and that is that again the cosmic
microwave background radiation has the
same
temperature all over the sky and
it's as if somehow it all got together
and agreed what temperature it was going
to be at
now normally heat flows from hot regions
to cold regions
and equalizes the temperature but it can
only do that
at a speed at absolute maximum if it's
being carried by
radiation at the speed of light
that's the maximum rate at which heat
can flow from one
hot part of the universe to a cold part
and so
hot regions and cold regions that were
too
far apart would not be able to
reach an equilibrium and end up at the
same temperature
the way that inflation solves this is
saying ah yes but
they were all able to spend long enough
together when the universe was very very
tiny
to get into equilibrium and then
inflation carried the regions apart
so that they were made to be all the
same temperature
when they were very close together and
then carried
outside of the range of
a speed of light based temperature equal
equivalence building process i hope
that's
clear so that's
really why we believe in inflation
so i'm going to skip forwards to 10 to
the minus
12 to 10 to the minus 6 seconds
and these time units actually have names
they're a pico second
for 10 to the minus 12 and 10 to the
minus nine is a microsecond
and microseconds are starting to get
into almost as
a sensibly short period of time that uh
we worry about
it's um the same sort of time as one
clock tick
of the chip in your mobile phone
uh one micro second so these are things
we deal with every day
these days but during this period
the weak force and the electromagnetic
force is decoupled from each other
they're coupled when the temperature is
very very high
but as they temperature falls and things
start moving around more slowly
you start to be able to see another of
these phase
changes and the
forces become distinguishable
and the universe then fills with quarks
the components
of protons and neutrons
but at ten to the minus six at one
microsecond
the temperature is now low enough for
the quarks to start sticking together
to make things much more familiar in the
form of the protons and the neutrons
that go to build atoms that we
are ourselves made of and so the
universe from one microsecond onwards is
much more familiar to us than the rather
peculiar
states from earlier epochs
we have the four forces all separated
and we have mata
in the form of neutrons and protons and
of course
there are electrons involved as well
and so things then are quite familiar
and in fact next three minutes the rest
of the three minutes that i'm talking
about
we just see the expansion lowering the
temperature
and the universe is full of a hot plasma
of protons and neutrons flying around
but as the temperature drops and reaches
10 to the nine
degrees kelvin that's one billion
degrees it's uh now
such that the energy of the particles
allows nuclear fusion to work
temperatures above a billion and
you find that the energy of the
particles is so vast that
the products of nuclear fusion the
helium at the bottom of the diagram
there
get destroyed by other particles hitting
them
faster than they're made so you don't
really get anywhere
but below a billion degrees you're
talking about
the sort of temperature that occurs in
the middle of the
largest stars and fusion
can run and runs quite quickly
driving the hydrogen to form deuterium
helium-3 and helium-4 as shown on the
diagram
and then expansion is continuing
by the time you get to three minutes
the temperature is dropped below 10
million degrees
and now the universe is too cold
for fusion to begin the
hydrogen at the top there needs a
temperature of at least 10 million
in order to be moving fast enough for
the fusion
to deuterium the second step to occur
and so once the three minutes is up and
the temperature cools down
you've now got a temperature and a
density lower
than the core of the smallest type of
star the red dwarf star
and fusion switches off so you get this
burst of three minutes of pressure
cooker action
making hydrogen into the slightly
heavier elements
and in fact the full diagram is is here
we get protons
and neutrons at the bottom p and n
and they turn into the isotopes of
hydrogen
deuterium and tritium d and t
those can turn into helium 3 and helium
and all the arrows represent different
possible paths that that can take on the
diagram
depending on what collides with what and
that's indicated
in the little brackets there so where it
says
p comma gamma that's a proton
hitting something and a gamma ray
emerging
that's what that means and you can see
that it also
starts to try to build elements beyond
helium so the at the very top there we
have beryllium-7
and we've also got lithium-7 up there
and you can see that those can be made
by taking helium-3
and the arrow leading to 7 says
4 ag so a helium-4 nucleus
adds to a helium-3 and gives you
beryllium-7
but then what it says is there's a
downward going arrow
that that can be hit by a neutron and
give out a proton and you end up with
lithium-7
and that can be split apart again by
being hit by
a proton and sufficient back into two
heliums
so there's a sort of cycle that goes on
and so
you don't get much lithium or beryllium
made by this process
because you only get the little tiny
amounts that
happen to be in play in that cycle
when the music stopped at three minutes
and the temperature
got low enough for all these reactions
not to be possible
and so it left the universe with 75
hydrogen 24 percent helium
and a very small amount of some of the
other elements
that just were the intermediate products
of these cycles
and sort of froze out when the music
stopped